---
pubDatetime: 2023-02-15T00:00:00.000+00:00
issue: strategy
bibliography: ./../../jerrobs.strategy.json
version: "1.0 (unpublished)"
title: Case Study
subtitle: European Synchrotron and FEL User Organisation
sectionNumber: STY.002
tags:
  - issue:strategy
  - topic:strategy/esuo
description: >
  Making the European Commission change its mind
---

THE STARTING POINT
With the seven-year research framework programme HORIZON 2020 starting in 2014, the European Commission changed its funding strategy: Instead of spreading funding over a large number of different intervention areas, a more focused approach was to be implemented.

This meant the discontinuation of programmes to fund research visits by European scientists to photon sources abroad (Transnational Access Funding).

The new funding strategy not only endangered functioning European cooperation, but was also perceived as an existential threat by the _European Synchrotron User Organisation ESUO_.

## The Strategy

To address this threat, ESUO had initiated two counter measures:

1. **Addressing the European Commission directly** (November 2013)<br>
   Letter of concern to the European Commission demanding the continuation of trans-national access funding
2. **Securing community backing** (April 2014)<br>  
   Letter to the editors of the "Journal of Synchrontron Radiation" elaborating the demands of the letter of concern. (@barrier_brazfernandes_etal__2014__benefit)

Neither measure succeeded in changing the Commission's mind.

Since attempting to influence the Commission directly was not fruitful, ESUO decided to take a more indirect approach.

1. **Convincing influencers** (September 2014)
   European-wide campaign addressing the national members of HORIZON 2020 program committees

## Result

The European Commission invited ESUO to apply for a funding programme of trans-national access within HORIZON @@ 2020. The application resulted in the funding of the CALYPSO PLUS, a four-year project with a funding volume of 18 million euros.

While there is no proof for the „correctness“ of the chosen strategy, it is safe to say:

- Thanks to the self-commitment approach, the EC got a much better deal than if it only responded to demands.
- ESUO got a sharper vision and mission for itself.
